[decision] Change Tracking (#4554)
ElektraInitiative/libelektra: doc/decisions/change_tracking.md

1. pointless waste of resources, as data is duplicated in each plugin,
2. multiplication of code, generating a maintenance burden.

The current approach to change tracking in plugins is very fragile.
Basically, what plugins currently do is:

1. on `kdbGet` duplicate the returned keyset,
2. on `kdbSet` calculate what changed in between.

This basic approach will fail when there is another `kdbGet` operation for a different part of the KDB in between.
For an illustration, take the following code sample:

```c
Key * keyA = ...;
Key * keyB = ...;
// assume that neither A below B nor B below A

KeySet * a = ...;
KeySet * b = ...;

kdbGet(kdb, a, keyA); // (A)
kdbGet(kdb, b, keyB); // (B)

kdbSet(kdb, a, keyA); // (C)
```

- At point `(A)` the plugins internally store the KeySet for key `a`
- At point `(B)` the plugins internally override the stored the KeySet with the KeySet for key `b`
- At point `(C)` they will generate a wrong changeset for key `a`

## Constraints

Change tracking must:

- be transparent to developers using the public Elektra API
- be transparent to users changing configuration data

> - only be done if it is required, i.e. a plugin specifically requests it

Reviewer: ```suggestion
- if overhead is not negligible: only do tracking as required, i.e., a plugin specifically requests it
```

# Change Tracking

## Problem

> Currently, a range of Elektra plugins are implementing some sort of change-tracking for configuration data.

Reviewer: change-tracking still has multiple spellings. If the word itself is written with `-`, then `-` always must be present (e.g. title above) and you can add it to scripts/sed.

# Change Tracking

## Problem

Currently, a range of Elektra plugins are implementing some sort for change-tracking of configuration data.
This includes, but is not limited to, the [internalnotification](../../src/plugins/internalnotification/README.md)
and [dbus](../../src/plugins/dbus/README.md) plugins. In the near future, Elektra shall also be extended with session recording.

Having multiple implementations for the same problem is problematic in multiple ways:

1. pointless waste of resources, as data is duplicated in each plugin,
2. multiplication of code, generating a maintenance burden.

Additionally, it was uncovered in issue [#4514](https://issues.libelektra.org/4514),
that the current approach to change tracking in plugins is very fragile.
Basically, what plugins do currently is:

1. on `kdbGet` duplicate the returned keyset,
2. on `kdbSet` calculate what changed inbetween.

> This basic approach will fail when there is another `kdbGet` operation for another key inbetween.

Reviewer 2: I think it's not just about the "allowed sequences", but also about the intended meaning of these sequences. For the case where "neither A below B nor B below A" I couldn't come up with a sensible intended meaning. That's why I originally chose this example. But for other relations there can be sensible meaning depending on the contents of the keysets, e.g. "overwrite all", "remove parts" etc.

For an illustration, take the following code sample:

```c
Key * keyA = ...;
Key * keyB = ...;
// assume that neither A below B nor B below A

KeySet * a = ...;
KeySet * b = ...;

kdbGet(kdb, a, keyA); // (A)
kdbGet(kdb, b, keyB); // (B)

kdbSet(kdb, a, keyA); // (C)
```

- At point `(A)` the plugins internally store the KeySet for key `a`
- At point `(B)` the plugins internally override the stored the KeySet with the KeySet for key `b`
- At point `(C)` they will generate a wrong changeset for key `a`

Now, this problem could be overcome by also remembering the key for which the KeySet was read, but none of the plugins do that.
Changing this leads us back to problem number 2, the maintenance burden.

## Constraints

Change tracking must:

- be transparent to developers using the public Elektra API

> - be transparent to users changing configuration data

Author: No. Developers = people elektrifying applications
Users = Users of those elektrified applications of the `kdb` command line utility

> - be transparent to users changing configuration data

Reviewer: I probably need an example to understand what you are aiming at. My thought was that users indirectly also use the public Elektra API, so if it is transparent to the API it must be transparent to the user.

> - be transparent to users changing configuration data

Author: Yes, Users indirectly use the public API. In that sense we could remove this constraint. But I think it doesn't hurt to specify it.

> - be transparent to users changing configuration data

Reviewer 2: I think is not worth our time to discuss whether a constraint/assumption is redundant...

IMO this way makes things more explicit which is a good thing in a decision. There should be as few unmentioned implications as possible.

> - only be done if it is required, i.e. a plugin specifically requests it

Author: Yes, but we don't know that yet.

- not duplicate data for each plugin that wants change tracking
- work with arbitrary sequences of `kdbGet` and `kdbSet`
- not require any changes in the plugin API for plugins without change tracking

## Assumptions

- Some kind of memory and computation overhead is acceptable

>   as long as it doesn't scale linearly (or worse) with the number of plugins

Author: Do you have any suggestions for those constraints?

>   as long as it doesn't scale linearly (or worse) with the number of plugins

Reviewer: It shouldn't get worse. Compensations with other improvements is possible.

3. Do the per-parent-key tracking within `libelektra-kdb`, within the `kdbGet` and `kdbSet` operations.

   This is the first option that does not break any of the constraints.

   Essentially, we'd have a 'giant' hashmap in the form of (parent key)->(KeySet) for all parent keys
   that were used for a `kdbGet` operation in the lifetime of the `kdb` instance. We also need to
   update it on `kdbSet` so that a future `kdbSet` operation without a `kdbGet` will also work.

   When change tracking is enabled, this one will have the most memory overhead, as we need to deep-dup  
   every key we have read or stored.

4. Do the per-parent-key tracking within `libelektra-kdb`, but with meta-keys.

   Essentially the same approach as above, but instead of deep-duping, we add the original value
   as a meta-key to every key. Not yet clear how we handle changes to meta-data then.

5. Outsource the change tracking into a separate plugin.

   Essentially the same as (3), just that it is implemented within a plugin and not
   `libelektra-kdb`. This will be a hook plugin, and will be called within `kdbGet` and `kdbSet` accordingly.

>    It will also need to export a hook-method to get the changeset.

Author: Pushed an update with more details.

6. Do copy-on-write change tracking within `libelektra-core`.

   This option will also not break any of the constraints.

   The idea here is that we extend the `KeySet` and `Key` structs with additional fields.
   For `KeySet` we need to track the following info:

   - What keys have been removed
   - What keys have been added
   - Whether tracking is enabled for this KeySet

   For `Key` we need to track:

   - Original value of the key
   - Size of the original value (for binary keys)
   - Whether tracking is enabled for this key

   The tracking itself would be done within the `ks*` and `key*` methods, after checking if it is enabled.
   It would also transparently work for meta-data, as meta-data itself is implemented as a keyset with keys.

>    Two downsides of this method have been identified by @kodebach:

Reviewer: Acknowledgements only in Notes please.

>    - It adds functionality to `libelektra-core` which is supposed to be minimal

Reviewer: Add a constraint above and say here this violates the constraint.

   - Adding fields to the structs causes a slight memory overhead, even with tracking turned off.
     While neglectable for `KeySet` due to the low amount of keysets in typical applications,
     it may be noticable for `Key`. On a 64-bit system we'd add 8+8=16 bytes to it.
     To put this in perspective, the current size of the `Key` struct is 64 bytes,
     so we'd add 25% overhead to an empty key. However, this percentage will be much lower in

>      a real-world application, as the usefulness of an empty key is very low.

Reviewer: @atmaxinger can you please elaborate which 16 bytes you mean? Isn't a single pointer to "change-tracking data" enough? And maybe it even can be in meta-data, not needing any extra bytes in _Key.

>      a real-world application, as the usefulness of an empty key is very low.

Reviewer 2: 8 bytes for the pointer, 8 bytes for the size.

I won't comment on the rest, because this clearly goes into too much detail. If the problem is now clear, this PR should be merged and this should be addressed in the next PR.

# Change Tracking

## Problem

Currently, a range of Elektra plugins are implementing some sort of change-tracking for configuration data.

> This includes, but is not limited to, the [internalnotification](../../src/plugins/internalnotification/README.md)

Reviewer: ```suggestion
This includes, but is not limited to, the [internalnotification](/src/plugins/internalnotification/README.md)
```

> and [dbus](../../src/plugins/dbus/README.md) plugins. In the near future, Elektra shall also be extended with session recording.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
and [dbus](/src/plugins/dbus/README.md) plugins. In the near future, Elektra shall also be extended with session recording.
```

> Having multiple implementations for the same problem is problematic in multiple ways:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
These competing change-tracking implementations create two problems:
```

1. pointless waste of resources, as data is duplicated in each plugin,
2. multiplication of code, generating a maintenance burden.

> The current approach to change tracking in plugins is very fragile.

Reviewer: "very" is subjective and not very scientific :wink: 

```suggestion
Furthermore, the current approach to change tracking in plugins is fragile.
```

Basically, what plugins currently do is:

1. on `kdbGet` duplicate the returned keyset,
2. on `kdbSet` calculate what changed in between.

> This basic approach will fail when there is another `kdbGet` operation for a different part of the KDB in between.

Reviewer: I stopped reading here, as this duplicates with #4574

Author: I removed it and referenced #4574 instead.

- At point `(B)` the plugins internally override the stored the KeySet with the KeySet for key `b`
- At point `(C)` they will generate a wrong changeset for key `a`

For `KeySet` we need to track the following info:

- What keys have been removed
- What keys have been added

For `Key` we need to track:

- Original value of the key
- Size of the original value (for binary keys)

> Tracking should only be done on the following namespaces:

Reviewer 2: You forgot `spec:/`
